    Headstand: An asana in which you balance on your elbows, arms, and head.
    Known as the "King of the Asanas" because of its remarkable benefits, the Headstand is the first of the 12 asanas and is excellent for improving concentration, increasing memory, and transforming libido into powerful life force. In addition, people who practice Sir?asana on a regular basis tend to have slower rates of respiration and heart rate. To the surprise of many first-time students, this pose does not require any special strength or flexibility; all it takes is practice and going step-by-step. Even so, you may wish to begin by undertaking the Dolphin, progressing to the full Headstand over time.
    Objective: To relax and invigorate your entire body.
    Contraindications
    It is best not to practice Headstand if you:
    •   Have high or low blood pressure.
•   Suffer from glaucoma or have had recent eye surgery.
•   Have had a recent neck injury.
•   Are menstruating.
    Step 1 - Define the Space
    Lean forwards, clasping each hand around the opposite elbow and place your arms about 8 inches away from your knees on the floor in front of you. Keep the buttocks on the heels.
    Step 2 - Form a Triangle Base
    Keeping your elbows where they are, move your hands forward and interlock your fingers. This creates a firm triangular base with your hands and elbows, with equal weight on all three points of the triangle. Mentally affirm "my arms are my legs".
    Step 3 - Head to Floor
    Bend over and place the topmost part of your head on the floor, firmly pressing the tripod of elbows and hands against the mat and with your hands firmly supporting the back of your head. Do not move the elbows. Keep the neck straight.
    Step 4 - Straighten Knees & Lift the Hips
    Without moving the head or elbows, straighten the knees and lift the hips. The weight is kept on the elbows. Make sure that the elbows are stationary.
    Step 5 - Walk the Feet Forward
    Walk the feet forward, trying to keep the knees straight. As the feet come closer to the head, feel the back straightening. Keep walking until the hips are directly over the head. Keep pressing the weight on the supporting tripod you have made with your arms.
    Step 6 - Knees to Chest
    Carefully lift the feet off the ground, bending the knees to the chest. This requires using the abdominal and lumbar muscles. Bring the feet up to the buttocks and try to hold this position. Straighten the back. Do not try to 'jump' or 'kick up' and do not try to straighten your legs as you could easily lose balance doing this and fall straight on your back. Instead, slowly tilt your pelvis backwards until you find the point of balance in your lower back. In this position, the weight of your bent legs is balanced by the weight of your hips and buttocks. Keep as much support as possible on your forearms and hands. Breathe rhythmically and hold this half headstand for up to one minute.
    Step 7 - Straighten the Hips
    Keeping the knees bent and together, slowly straighten the hips until the bent knees are pointing towards the ceiling. Feel as though the hips are a hinge that is slowly opening. Do not be in a hurry. Keep the concentration on the elbows and make sure they do not lift off the ground. Also focus on the balance in your lower back, so that your body neither topples forwards nor backwards.
    Step 8 - Straighten the Knees
    Slowly straighten the knees, bringing the feet up. Remember to keep the weight on the elbows and breathe deeply. Start with 5 seconds, gradually increasing the time to fifteen minutes. Optimum time is five to ten minutes on a daily basis. While in the headstand make the breath smooth and rhythmical. The weight remains on the elbows.
    Coming Down
    Gently leave this asana as carefully as you entered it.
    •   Bend your knees and lower them.
•   Straighten your legs. Bring your feet to the ground, and then lower your knees.
•   Lower your body so that your buttocks rest on your heels as in the Child's Pose.
•   Finally, relax your hands and return to the full Child's Pose.
•   Do not lift your head up straight away. Rest for at least a minute.
•   Relax in the Corpse Pose before continuing.
    n.
    Headstand: An asana in which you balance on your elbows, arms, and head.
    Known as the "King of the Asanas" because of its remarkable benefits, the Headstand is the first of the 12 asanas and is excellent for improving concentration, increasing memory, and transforming libido into powerful life force. In addition, people who practice Sir?asana on a regular basis tend to have slower rates of respiration and heart rate. To the surprise of many first-time students, this pose does not require any special strength or flexibility; all it takes is practice and going step-by-step. Even so, you may wish to begin by undertaking the Dolphin, progressing to the full Headstand over time.
    Objective: To relax and invigorate your entire body.
    Contraindications
    It is best not to practice Headstand if you:
    •   Have high or low blood pressure.
•   Suffer from glaucoma or have had recent eye surgery.
•   Have had a recent neck injury.
•   Are menstruating.
    Step 1 - Define the Space
    Lean forwards, clasping each hand around the opposite elbow and place your arms about 8 inches away from your knees on the floor in front of you. Keep the buttocks on the heels.
    Step 2 - Form a Triangle Base
    Keeping your elbows where they are, move your hands forward and interlock your fingers. This creates a firm triangular base with your hands and elbows, with equal weight on all three points of the triangle. Mentally affirm "my arms are my legs".
    Step 3 - Head to Floor
    Bend over and place the topmost part of your head on the floor, firmly pressing the tripod of elbows and hands against the mat and with your hands firmly supporting the back of your head. Do not move the elbows. Keep the neck straight.
    Step 4 - Straighten Knees & Lift the Hips
    Without moving the head or elbows, straighten the knees and lift the hips. The weight is kept on the elbows. Make sure that the elbows are stationary.
    Step 5 - Walk the Feet Forward
    Walk the feet forward, trying to keep the knees straight. As the feet come closer to the head, feel the back straightening. Keep walking until the hips are directly over the head. Keep pressing the weight on the supporting tripod you have made with your arms.
    Step 6 - Knees to Chest
    Carefully lift the feet off the ground, bending the knees to the chest. This requires using the abdominal and lumbar muscles. Bring the feet up to the buttocks and try to hold this position. Straighten the back. Do not try to 'jump' or 'kick up' and do not try to straighten your legs as you could easily lose balance doing this and fall straight on your back. Instead, slowly tilt your pelvis backwards until you find the point of balance in your lower back. In this position, the weight of your bent legs is balanced by the weight of your hips and buttocks. Keep as much support as possible on your forearms and hands. Breathe rhythmically and hold this half headstand for up to one minute.
    Step 7 - Straighten the Hips
    Keeping the knees bent and together, slowly straighten the hips until the bent knees are pointing towards the ceiling. Feel as though the hips are a hinge that is slowly opening. Do not be in a hurry. Keep the concentration on the elbows and make sure they do not lift off the ground. Also focus on the balance in your lower back, so that your body neither topples forwards nor backwards.
    Step 8 - Straighten the Knees
    Slowly straighten the knees, bringing the feet up. Remember to keep the weight on the elbows and breathe deeply. Start with 5 seconds, gradually increasing the time to fifteen minutes. Optimum time is five to ten minutes on a daily basis. While in the headstand make the breath smooth and rhythmical. The weight remains on the elbows.
    Coming Down
    Gently leave this asana as carefully as you entered it.
    •   Bend your knees and lower them.
•   Straighten your legs. Bring your feet to the ground, and then lower your knees.
•   Lower your body so that your buttocks rest on your heels as in the Child's Pose.
•   Finally, relax your hands and return to the full Child's Pose.
•   Do not lift your head up straight away. Rest for at least a minute.
•   Relax in the Corpse Pose before continuing.
    SARVA?GASANA
    
    Shoulderstand: An inverted pose, with your body resting on your shoulders.
    Sarva?gasana, the Sanskrit name for the Shoulderstand, comes from the word "sarva?ga", meaning all parts. This asana strengthens the entire body; it gives many of the benefits of the Headstand, but here the circulation is directed to the thyroid gland instead of the head. The thyroid is an important gland of the endocrine system and this exercise gives it a rich supply of blood, improving and balancing the metabolism of literally every cell in the body. Other benefits of this posture includes stimulating cheerfulness, promoting clear thinking, and helping to cure depression.
    Objective: To stretch your cervical and thoracic regions.
    Contraindications
    It is best not to practice Shoulderstand if you:
    •   Have neck problems.
•   Have high blood pressure, do not hold the pose for more than 30 seconds.
•   Are menstruating, consider holding this posture for 15-30 seconds or skip it altogether.
    Step 1 - Legs Up
    Before beginning the Shoulderstand, make sure that there is enough room behind you. You must be able to stretch your arms out behind your head and have at least a foot between your fingertips and any obstructions. Lie flat on your back, with your feet together. Inhale while bringing your legs up to a right angle.
    Step 2 - Body Up
    Tuck your hands under your buttocks, with your fingers pointing toward your spine. Then, as you exhale, gently raise your body by letting your hands walk down your back and push you into position.
    Step 3 - In Balance
    Continue to move your hands up your back until you rest on your shoulders. Breathe normally, and keep your legs straight. Hold for 30 seconds; as the pose becomes easier, increase the time to 3 minutes. To come down, drop your feet halfway to the floor behind your head. Put your hands on the floor. Unroll your body vertebra by vertebra to the floor. Hand position: Put your hands on the small of your back, with your fingers toward your spine.
    Variation
    Inhale with your hands on your back. Exhale and bring one foot to the floor behind your head. Inhale. Raise your leg. Swap sides.
    HALASANA
    
    Plough: Forward bend, while lying on your back with feet and hands on the floor.
    Halasana, the Sanskrit name for the Plough, helps to keep the whole spine youthful. It stretches the back of the body completely which invigorates the entire spine. It also loosens tight hamstrings. It is said that he/she who practices Halasana is very nimble, agile, and full of energy. Develop a consistent practice and see for yourself.
    Objective: To ease tension and improve spinal flexibility.
    Precaution:
    •   If you suffer from kyphosis (exaggerated forward bend of the upper back), be very gentle and easy in this posture.
•   Have asthma? You may experience tightness in the chest if you hold Halasana for long. Hold it for a short time and then immediately come into the Fish.
    Step 1 - Legs Over
    In the Plough, your body is bent forward; this stretches your entire spine, particularly your cervical vertebrae and shoulders. Come up into a Shoulderstand, and inhale deeply. Exhale while lowering your feet to the floor behind your head.
    Step 2 - Legs Down
    Rest your toes on the floor, then lay your arms down flat. Hold for 30 seconds at first, but aim to build up to 2 minutes. If you cannot lower your feet all the way, keep your hands on your back for support. Your feet may not reach the floor to begin with but as your spine becomes more supple with practice, the weight of your legs will gradually pull them down. To come out, lift your feet off the floor, and slowly roll down. Relax in the Corpse.
    Plough Variation
    You may try this variation if you are supple enough. Once in the Plough, lower your knees to the floor by your ears. Hook your arms over your legs. To come out, straighten your knees, then roll down as described above.
    MATSYASANA
    
    Fish Pose: Lying on your back and arching your chest.
    The name of this posture, the Fish, derives from the fact that if we adopt the position in water, we float quite easily. On the physical level it is very effective in correcting any tendency to round the shoulders as well as helping to tone the nerves of the neck and the back area. On the mental level, with chest stretched wide open, this asana does wonders for opening our hearts to the world. After we practice Matsyasana, we find that we experience a much deeper relaxation in the resting position of savasana.
    Objective: Give a backward stretch to the cervical and thoracic regions of the spine.
    Precaution:
    If the extension of the neck causes any discomfort or dizziness, it is best not to practice the posture - or practice it for only a few breaths.
    Step 1 - Corpse Pose
    Assume the Corpse Pose and, when you are ready, begin to come into the fish. Stay flat on your back, and bring your feet together. With your arms straight by your sides, lay your palms on the floor, then tuck your hands in underneath your buttocks. Starting Pose: Prepare yourself for this asana by relaxing in savasana for as long as you need.
    Step 2 - Chest Out & Head Back
    Having arched your spine, tilt your head so that your crown rests on the ground. Hold for 30 seconds. To come out of the Fish, slide your head back and then lower your chest. To finish, relax by lying in savasana. Chest Lift: Press your elbows down on the floor, inhale, and arch your chest upward as far as you can.
    Fish Variations
    Try this variation if you are flexible enough: In the Easy Pose, clasp your toes. Lie back, arch up, and rest your buttocks on your heels. Lay the top of your head on the floor.
    •   Knees Bent - Sit cross-legged, then put your arms down behind your knees and catch hold of your toes.
•   Fish in Lotus - This pose is an advanced variation on the ordinary Fish. It is similar to the Easy Pose variation shown above, except that it begins with the Lotus. The Fish in Lotus pose should not be attempted by beginners, or even by more experienced yoga students, until the full Lotus position can be held comfortably for a long period of time.
    PASCIMOTHANASANA
    
    Sitting Forward Bend: Stretching your spine forward.
    The Forward Bend looks, and is, simple - provided we relax into the position, rather than forcing ourselves into it. In a world where exertion is often rewarded, this pose is one of the most powerful and important asanas in teaching us the benefits of working with life as it Is. This pose can be very meditative. It encourages conscious letting go by allowing gravity to pull the spine into the pose. As an added bonus, regular practice of Pascimottanasana also helps to counter the typical postural problems developed working a desk job by keeping the spine supple, the joints mobile, the internal organs toned, and the nervous system invigorated.
    Starting
    Inhale, bringing both arms up by your ears. Stretch your spine up. Lean forward from your hips, and try to catch hold of your toes. Keep your spine and legs straight. Exhale into the pose; feel your body stretch. Hold for 30 seconds, then inhale and stretch upward again. Repeat twice. Clasp Position: If you are not able to reach your toes, clasp your ankles, shins, or knees, to hold the position comfortably.
    Inclined Plane
    The Inclined Plane is the counterpose to the Forward Bend. It complements the forward stretch that your body is given in the previous pose, and increase the strength and flexibility of your arm. In this asana your hips are pushed upward, and your body is held straight and balanced on your hands and feet.
    From the starting position, sitting with the hands flat on the floor behind the hips, with the fingers pointing back, let your head drop back. Next, inhale as you raise your hips. Hold the pose for about 10 seconds. Lower your body, then relax your hands by shaking your wrists.
    BHUJA?GASANA
    
    Cobra: Coiling your upper body up and back.
    Bhuja?gasana, or the Cobra, is practiced as the first in the series of backward-bending exercises. When this asana is fully done, it gives the appearance of a hooded cobra. "Bhuja?g" means cobra in Sanskrit. We practice the asana in stages, visualizing the smooth, supple movement of a snake as we stretch the spine up and backward, vertebra by vertebra. Major benefits of this asana is that it works, massages, and tones the back muscles, particularly in the lumbar region. The arching of the spine also increases flexibility, rejuvenates spinal nerves, and provides a rich blood supply.
    Objective: Provide the spine a powerful backward stretch.
    Step 1 - Face Down
    Lie on your front. When you are fully relaxed, begin to come into the Cobra. Still lying on your front, place your hands flat on the floor so that they are directly underneath your shoulders. Next lift your head up a little and bend your neck, then lower your forehead to the ground.
    Step 2 - Roll Up
    Inhale, slowly rolling up and back. First bring your forehead up so that your nose rests on the floor, then continue rolling up and back. Move slowly, so that you feel each vertebra arching back.
    Step 3 - Hold
    Hold the pose for 10 to 60 seconds. Slowly roll down, keeping your head back until last. As you do the Cobra, make sure you are not overextending the lower back. No pain should be felt in the lower back. You may want to repeat it two more times.
    The Advanced Cobra - Variations
    Once you are proficient in the above steps, you can attempt some variations.
    •   In the Cobra, turn your head to look over your right shoulder, trying to see your left heel. Hold for about 10 seconds, then return your head to the center and repeat while looking over the other shoulder.
•   From the starting position, lift your hands off the ground and roll your body up using only your back muscles.
•   Always return to a resting position on your abdomen after these poses.
•   With practice you may be able to attempt the "King Cobra" variation in which your feet touch your head.
    SALABHASANA
    
    The Locust: Lying face down with lifted legs.
    Of all the asanas, Salabhasana is the one that works most on developing will power. According to Swami Vishnudevananda, exercising will power makes ones thoughts pure and powerful and is one of the primary goals of the practice of asanas. Unlike the other asanas which are done slowly, we achieve the Locust by making a single powerful muscle contraction, similar to that of a locust jumping. This action simultaneously brings together thought, breath, movement, and Pra?a - vital energy. The physical benefits of this pose is that all the internal organs are massaged, especially the pancreas, liver, and kidneys. It also gives a backward bend to the spine and opens the chest, bringing an increased blood supply to the neck and throat region.
    Objective: Increase will power and strengthen the lumbar.
    Step 1 - Face Down
    Lie on your front. Rest your chin on the ground, then move it forward as much as you can, so that your throat lies almost flat. Put your arms by your sides, then push your hands under your body, and make them into fists or clasp them together. Bring your elbows as close together as possible.
    Step 2 - Half Locust
    Inhale as you lift one leg. Hold this position for at least 10 seconds, then exhale while lowering your leg and repeat the pose with your other leg. Practice it 3 times on each side. Chin position: The further forward you push your chin, the more your spine can stretch and the more you will gain from this asana.
    Step 3 - Full Locust
    Lie with your chin out, as in the Half Locust, then take 3 deep breaths. On the third, lift both legs off the ground. They may not come up far at first, but with practice you may be able to lift them much higher. Hold for as long as you can, then lower your feet. Repeat twice and then relax.
    Up and Up: With practice, you will be able to raise your legs higher. Eventually, you may even be able to lift your body vertically.
    The Advanced Locust
    This more difficult pose must be attempted only by experienced students of yoga. The aim, in the advanced asana, is to raise your feet straight up and then lower them over your head. This backward bend compresses your vertebrae while stretching the front of your body to its greatest extent. The strength and flexibility necessary for this pose will eventually develop with regular practice.
    DHANURASANA
    
    Bow: Balancing on your abdomen, in the shape of a bow.
    The Bow works all parts of your back simultaneously, increasing suppleness in the spine and hips. In this asana, our head, chest, and legs are lifted, while our body rests on our abdomen. The pose is so named because as we hold it, our body is bent back like a bow and our arms are held straight and taut like a bowstring. Dhanurasana combines and enhances the benefits of both the Cobra and the Locust. The whole body rests on the abdomen, giving a good massage to the abdominal region, especially the digestive organs. Swing, rock, and rejoice. Mentally repeat O?, O?, O?.
    Objective: Give a full backward bend to the entire spine.
    Step 1 - Catch Hold
    To begin, lie on your front with your forehead on the ground. Now bend your knees and catch hold of your ankles. Make sure that you do grasp your ankles rather than the top of your feet or your toes. Keep your feet relaxed.
    Step 2 - Lift Up
    Inhale, raising your head, chest, and legs. Straighten your knees. Hold for 10 seconds, aiming to increase to 30. Breathe as you hold the pose. Exhale, and lower your body. Repeat 3 times.
    Rocking Bow
    For this variation, come into the Bow, arching as high as you can. Keep your head back and gently rock, using your breath to propel your body. Exhale as you rock forward, and inhale as you rock back. Do not forget to relax in the Corpse Pose on your front after you have completed this movement. Grip: Hold your ankles firmly as you rock.
    ARDHA MATSYENDRASANA
    
    Half Spinal Twist: A seated half twist.
    After the forward and backward bending of the spine, the Half Spinal Twist provides a lateral stretch which helps to relieve general lower back pain and muscular rheumatism of the back and hips. Each vertebra is rotated in both directions. The Half Spinal Twist has many beneficial effects on the gall bladder, spleen, kidneys, liver, and intestines. The abdominal muscles are massaged and the large intestine in particular is stimulated. This helps to relieve constipation, indigestion, and other digestive issues. On the spiritual level, this pose is also known to help raise ku??alini.
    Objective: To maintain sideways mobility in your spine.
    Step 1 - Legs Bent
    Sit up on your heels. Drop your buttocks to the floor, to the left of your legs.
    Step 2 - Leg Position
    Bend your right leg. Cross your right foot over your left leg, and place it on the floor by the outside of your left knee. Keeping your arm straight, put your right hand flat on the floor behind your back. Arms: Lay your right hand on the floor. Raise your left arm straight up.
    Step 3 - The Twist
    Lower your left arm, bringing it outside your bent knee, then grasp your right ankle. Hold for at least 30 seconds. Repeat, twisting the other way.
    KAKASANA
    
    Crow: Balancing in a squatting position.
    The Crow is one of the most beneficial of balancing poses. Although all asanas are designed as mental as well as physical exercises to prepare the mind and body for meditation, the balancing poses are what gives the most noticeable improvement. Besides increasing physical and mental balance, the Crow develops mental tranquility and also strengthens our arms, wrists, and shoulders. The muscles of fingers, wrists, and forearms are also stretched. Kakasana helps to increase the powers of concentration and remove lethargy.
    Objective: Promote physical and mental balance.
    Step 1 - Squat to Start
    To prepare yourself for the Crow, squat with your feet and knees wide apart. Position your arms between your knees, with your hands directly under your shoulders, then put your hands flat on the floor in front of you. Stretch your fingers wide and turn your hands inward slightly.
    Step 2 - Knees to Arms
    Bend your elbows, and turn them outward. Rest your knees against your upper arms. Next, rock forward until you feel your weight on your wrists. Stay in this position if you are unable to proceed further. This exercise is still useful even if you stop at this point, as your wrists support your weight and your forearm muscles are being stretched.
    Step 3 - Raise Your Feet
    Slowly raise each foot, then balance on your hands for at least 10 seconds. Aim to increase your time in the pose to 30 seconds; with practice you will be able to hold the position for up to a minute. To come out, lower your feet to the ground, sit up, and shake out your wrists. If you are strong enough, repeat the Crow twice.
    Protection - Fear of Falling
    Swami Vishnudevananda has sound advice for anyone with a fear of falling in the Crow. "If you are worried about falling onto your face, put a cushion in front of you."
    PADA HASTASANA
    
    Standing Forward Bend: Bending forward in a standing position.
    Pada Hastasana, whose Sanskrit name literally means hands to foot pose, is the first of the standing poses. If it is remembered that "we are as young as our spine is flexible", the Standing Forward Bend (as it is often known) will be seen as a veritable elixir of youth. This pose quickly lengthens the muscles and ligaments of the entire posterior side of the body - from our heels to the middle of our back. The Standing Forward Bend stretches our spine and increase the blood supply to our brain.
    Objective: To make your spine and legs supple and strong.
    Precaution:
    If the backs of your knees are naturally overextended, focus on keeping your knees straight without pushing them backwards.
    Forward & Down
    This pose is similar to the Sitting Forward Bend, but here gravity helps to stretch your body down. Stand with your feet together. Inhale, while lifting your arms straight above your head. Exhale as you bend forward and down. Breathe normally while you are in the pose. Hold for at least 30 seconds: as you gain experience, increase the time to several minutes.
    TRIKO?ASANA
    
    The Triangle: A lateral bend resembling a triangle.
    Since this asana gives the appearance of a triangle, it bears the name Triko?asana. The Triangle is a unique asana. It provides very good lateral movement to the spine and stretches and strengthens several muscles on the side of the body at the same time. It also helps with balance. It augments the movement of the Half Spinal Twist and is the last of the twelve basic asanas in the cycle. With the completion of this pose, we have now stretched the spine in every direction: front-to-back, side-to-side, and twisting to both sides.
    Objective: A lateral stretch for the spine on both sides.
    Initial Pose
    Stand up straight, and place your feet slightly more than shoulder width apart.
    To the Side
    The Triangle is a lateral stretch for your trunk muscles and spine, and makes your hips, legs, and shoulders more flexible. Stretch your right arm up, then bend to your left, sliding your left hand down your thigh. Do not twist your body. Hold for 30 seconds, working up to two minutes with practice. Inhale as you straighten up again. Repeat the pose on the other side.
    Body Line
    Your body forms a straight line, parallel to the floor, from your waist to your fingertips.
